---
layout: post
title:  "Lesson04 - Registries"
date:   2017-01-22
author: "@lucjuggery"
tags: [techwhale]
---

# Using Docker Open Source Registry

In this lab, we will put into practice what we saw regarding the open source version of the Docker Registry. This one is available as an official image on the Docker Hub.

## Launch a container based on the official Docker Registry image

We will use the official **registry** image available on the Docker Hub. We need to use the version 2 as the 1 is deprecated.

```.term1
docker container run -d -p 5000:5000 registry:2
```

Note: we use the **-d** flag so it runs in backgroud, and the **-p** flag to map container's port 5000 to host's port 5000.

## Make sure registry is empty (no image)

Using the registry HTTP Rest API, we first make sure the catalog is empty, in other words that no image are currently present in the registry.

```.term1
curl localhost:5000/v2/_catalog
```

## Pull an image

Pull the image of your choice (Linux distrubution, database, web server, ...). In this example we will go for nginx.

```.term1
docker image pull nginx
```

## Tag this image with the format expected by the registry

As we use our own regsitry, all the images that are stored inside it needs to be tagged in the following way.

```
localhost:5000/NAME:VERSION
```

We will then tag the nginx image we have pulled (do the same if you have pulled another image than the nginx one), and use **w3** as the image name and **v1.0** as the version.

```.term1
docker image tag nginx localhost:5000/w3:v1.0
```

## Push tagged image

Now that the image is tagged with the correct format, it can be pushed to the registry.

```.term1
docker image push localhost:5000/w3:v1.0
```

## Make sure the image is listed in the registry

We will now check in the regsitry that our new image is in the catalog.

```.term1
curl localhost:5000/v2/_catalog
```

This is a basic example that illustrates how the open source registry is working. Several key points we need to note:

1. By default a Docker Engine cannot use a registry that is not secured (as this is the case for the open source one). Two options then: 
   * to change the configuration settings of the Docker Engine and restart it using the --insecure-registry flag
   * to use the localhost exception meaning that if we can access the registry on localhost this usage is possible even if the Docker Engine does not use the --insecure-registry flag. This is the option we used in this example.
2. When not using Docker Hub as the image registry, we need to tag the image with the hostname:port prefix.
